Reorganize monitoring documentation #617 (#660)
rucio/documentation: docs/operator/monitoring.md

Reviewer: If possible, we should get a monitoring component lead to also approve these changes

  'primaryColor': '#d8e3e7',
  'edgeLabelBackground': '#ffffff',
  'tertiaryColor': '#cdd5d9',
  'fontFamily': 'monospace',
  'primaryBorderColor': '#90a4ae',
  'lineColor': '#90a4ae'
}}}%%
flowchart TB
  subgraph RucioTransfer["**Internal Monitoring**"]
        A1["Rucio Servers & Daemons"]

        G1["Graphite"]
        P1["Prometheus"]
        GF["Grafana"]
  end

  %% Edges
  A1 -- "push" --> G1
  A1 -- "pull or push" --> P1
  G1 --> GF
  P1 --> GF

  %% Style definitions
  classDef mono fill:#d8e3e7,stroke:#607d8b,color:#000,font-size:12px;
  classDef grafana fill:#F05A28,stroke:#b03e16,color:#fff,font-weight:bold;
  classDef graphite fill:#555555,stroke:#333333,color:#fff,font-weight:bold;  %% Dark gray for Graphite
  classDef prometheus fill:#009688,stroke:#00695C,color:#fff,font-weight:bold; %% Teal, distinct

  %% Apply styles
  class A1 mono;
  class G1 graphite;
  class P1 prometheus;
  class GF grafana;
```

There are two options:

1. Graphite
   
   Metrics are pushed to a Graphite server.
   
     ```cfg
     [monitor]
     # specify the hostname for carbon server
     carbon_server = <hostname>
     carbon_port = 8125
     user_scope = rucio
     ```

> 2. Prometheus

Author: added in recent commit as different section.

      smtp_port = 587
      smtp_username = my-smtp-user
      smtp_password = my-smtp-pass
      smtp_usessl = False
      smtp_usetls = True
      smtp_certfile = 
      smtp_keyfile = 
      ```
### Event Types
Different event types are created
  - Transfers: `transfer-submitted`, `transfer-submission_failed`, `transfer-queued`, `transfer-failed`, `transfer-done`
  - Deletions: `deletion-done`, `deletion-not-found`, `deletion-failed`
  - Rules: `RULE_OK`, and `RULE_PROGRESS`
  - Locks: `DATASETLOCK_OK`
  - DIDs: `CREATE_CNT` and `CREATE_DTS`
  - Replicas: `INCOMPLETE` and `ERASE`

The structure of messages table which is extracted by Hermes is:
```json
{
  "id": "UUID4",
  "services": "<service_name>",
  "event_type": "<event_type>",
  "created_at": "yyyy-MM-dd HH:mm:ss.SSSSSS",
  "payload": {},
  "payload_nolimit": {},
}
```
where:
- id: UUID string
- event_type: string describing the event_type listed before
- payload: small JSON object (max 4000 chars), structure varies by event type
- payload_nolimit: optional large JSON object. Only if payload larger than 4000 characters
- services: optional comma string identifying the service. (elastic, activemq, influx)

> - created_at: When the message was created. ISO 8601 timestamps

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `created_at`: When the message was created. ISO 8601 timestamps
```

To quickly inspect the payloads of these event types:
```sql
SELECT id, created_at, payload
FROM messages
WHERE event_type = '<event_type>'
ORDER BY created_at DESC
LIMIT 2;
```

> replace event_type with actual name that you want to inspect. We can also check `messages_history` table.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
replace `event_type` with actual name that you want to inspect. We can also check `messages_history` table.
```

### Format of Messages Delivered by Hermes 
The final format of the message is determined by the destination service, as Hermes transforms the raw database message into the required wire protocol for external systems.

- ActiveMQ (STOMP Message): The body is a streamlined JSON object containing only event_type, payload, and created_at. The message uses STOMP headers to set the event_type and flag the message as persistent.

> - Elasticsearch / OpenSearch (Bulk API): Hermes sends the raw database JSON message (including id and services) as a document using Bulk API format (via a POST request).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Elasticsearch / OpenSearch (Bulk API): Hermes sends the raw database JSON message (including `id` and `services`) as a document using Bulk API format (via a POST request).
```

> - InfluxDB (Line Protocol): Hermes performs on-the-fly aggregation of transfers and deletions, counting successes/failures and bytes. It does not send the raw event JSON. The final format is the InfluxDB Line Protocol, which consists of a single text line combining the measurement, tags (e.g., RSE, activity), fields (e.g., nb_done=10), and a timestamp.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- InfluxDB (Line Protocol): Hermes performs on-the-fly aggregation of transfers and deletions, counting successes/failures and bytes. It does not send the raw event JSON. The final format is the InfluxDB Line Protocol, which consists of a single text line combining the measurement, tags (e.g., RSE, activity), fields (e.g., `nb_done=10`), and a timestamp.
```

Example Grafana dashboard for transfer is provided [here](https://github.com/rucio/monitoring-templates/blob/main/message-monitoring/Dashboards/Rucio-Transfer.json)

> > **Note**: Please make changes to dashboard according to your setup and needs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> **Note**: Please make changes to the dashboard according to your setup and needs.
```

## Traces

> Rucio clients can send trace events on every file upload or download. These are posted to the /traces endpoint and forwarded to a message broker such as ActiveMQ via STOMP. Messages are consumed by Rucio’s Kronos daemon or by external consumers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Rucio clients can send trace events on every file upload or download. These are posted to the `/traces` endpoint and forwarded to a message broker such as ActiveMQ via STOMP. Messages are consumed by Rucio’s Kronos daemon or by external consumers.
```

  class DB1,LS mono;
  class LS logstash;
  class OS2 OpenSearch;
  class GD grafana;
```

A typical Logstash configuration consists of three sections — input, filter, and output. For example, the input section defines the PostgreSQL connection and SQL query to fetch data:
```
input {
   jdbc {
      jdbc_connection_string => "jdbc:postgresql://host:5432/<dbname>""
      jdbc_user => ""
      jdbc_password => ""
      jdbc_driver_library => "/usr/share/logstash/java/postgresql-<version>.jar"
      jdbc_driver_class => "org.postgresql.Driver"
      statement => "SELECT rses.rse, rse_usage.source, rse_usage.used, rse_usage.free, rse_usage.files FROM rse_usage INNER JOIN rses ON rse_usage.rse_id=rses.id WHERE rse_usage.files IS NOT NULL AND rse_usage.files!=0;"
      schedule => "0 0 * * *"
   }
}

filter {
   # Placeholder for transformations or enrichments
   # Examples:
   # - Add computed fields
   # - Rename fields
   # - Convert units (e.g., bytes to GB)
   # - Drop unwanted fields
}

output {
  elasticsearch {
    hosts => ["http://elasticsearh:9200"]
    action => "index"
    index => "rucio_rse"
    user => "elastic"
    password => "password"
  }
}
```
Few points:

> - jdbc_driver_library: Can downloaded from [jdbc.postgresql.org](https://jdbc.postgresql.org/), choose the version that you want to use and enable that in logstash.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `jdbc_driver_library`: Can be downloaded from [jdbc.postgresql.org](https://jdbc.postgresql.org/), choose the version that you want to use and enable that in Logstash.
```

## Rucio Monitoring Probes

Rucio provides a collection of **monitoring probes** that check the different status metrics of the Rucio.
The list of probes is available [here](https://github.com/rucio/probes/tree/master/common) probes shared across experiments. Also can create experiment-specific probes for custom monitoring like [ATLAS](https://github.com/rucio/probes/tree/master/atlas) and [CMS](https://github.com/rucio/probes/tree/master/cms).

Rucio provides a prebuilt container on [Docker Hub](https://hub.docker.com/r/rucio/probes) that includes:

- All dependencies for running the probes.
- A lightweight **Jobber** daemon for scheduling probe execution.
- The full Rucio probe repository. Custom probes can be added by introducing them to your own Rucio instance.

The container can push results either to a **Prometheus Pushgateway** or export data for **Nagios** alerting.

```mermaid
%%{init: {'theme': 'base', 'themeVariables': {
  'primaryColor': '#d8e3e7',
  'edgeLabelBackground': '#ffffff',
  'tertiaryColor': '#cdd5d9',
  'fontFamily': 'monospace',
  'primaryBorderColor': '#90a4ae',
  'lineColor': '#90a4ae'
}}}%%
flowchart LR

>   Probe["Rucio Probes (Schedule via Jabber or others)"]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  Probe["Rucio Probes (Schedule via Jobber or others)"]
```

       scope: scope of the deleted replica
       name: name of the deleted replica
       rse: rse holding the deleted replica
       file-size: size of the file
       bytes: size of the file
       url: url of the file
       duration: duration of the deletion
       protocol: prococol used in the deletion
       reason: reason of the failure
     }
   }
   ```
3. Rule Event
   ```
    created_at: when the message was created (yyyy-MM-ddTHH:mm:ss.SSSSSS)
    event_type: 'RULE_OK' or 'RULE_PROGRESS'
    payload:{
      'scope': scope.external,
      'name': name,
      'rule_id': rule_id, # only for RULE_OK and RULE_PROGRESS
      'vo': vo # only if not default
      'progress': int #replication progress # only for RULE_PROGRESS
      'dataset_name': dataset_name, # only for LOST
      'dataset_scope': dataset_scope # only for LOST
    }
   ```
4. Dataset Lock Event
   ```
   {
     created_at: when the message was created (yyyy-MM-ddTHH:mm:ss.SSSSSS)
     event_type: 'DATASETLOCK_OK'
     payload: {
       'scope': did_scope,
       'name': did_name,
       'rse': rse,
       'rse_id': rse_id,
       'rule_id': rule_id
       'vo': vo if not default
      }
   }
   ```

> There are other event for replicas, dids etc  not stated here.

Reviewer 2: Apologies for this vague comment. Instead of just saying 'This list isn't exhaustive' is there something we can give operators to find the exhaustive list? If not, we can resolve this comment

### Dashboard
[Kibana Dashboard](https://github.com/rucio/rucio/tree/master/tools/monitoring/visualization) example was given.
[Grafana Dashboard](https://github.com/rucio/monitoring-templates/blob/main/message-monitoring/Dashboards/Rucio-Transfer.json) for transfer for Elasticsearch/OpenSearch example given.

> Note: Dashboard example is just for giving some idea, they might need to be tweaked according to your setup and needs. They might be also be on old versions. 

Author: The reference to https://github.com/rucio/rucio/tree/master/tools/monitoring/ is being discussed in:
https://github.com/rucio/rucio/issues/7375 . So might be removed.

And the reference to https://github.com/rucio/monitoring-templates/ remains as it is maintained. (with some warning  like some tweaks may be needed)

## Traces

> The traces are sent by the pilots or the rucio clients whenever a file is downloaded/uploaded. These trace events are sent to the Rucio server via the /traces endpoint using HTTPS POST, where they are forwarded to messaging backends such as ActiveMQ via STOMP. ActiveMQ acts as the messaging broker, delivering trace events to Kronos daemon. Any consumer like logstash can the be used for relaying traces to data pipelines for further processing if needed. And then directly or after processing be sent to storage backends such as OpenSearch, Elasticsearch, or InfluxDB, which allow querying, aggregation, and analytics. Finally, visualization tools like Grafana and Kibana can be used.

Reviewer 2: Unsure what you mean by "pilots" here. 

This paragraph ends up a little dense and unreadable, so it may better to omit and just relay on the diagram below

Author: condensed it in recent commit.

    action => "index"
    index => "rucio_rse"
    user => "elastic"
    password => "password"
  }
}
```
Few points:
- jdbc_driver_library: Can downloaded from [jdbc.postgresql.org](https://jdbc.postgresql.org/), choose the version that you want to use and enable that in logstash.
- schedule: Defines how often the query runs (Cron-like syntax).
- output: Defines where the extracted data are delivered. In most deployments, these are indexed into OpenSearch or Elasticsearch for analytics dashboards in Grafana or Kibana:
- filter: This is optional. It helps in preprocessing your data before indexing

Some [Kibana dashboard](https://github.com/rucio/rucio/tree/master/tools/monitoring/visualization/db_dump) example given.
[Grafana dashboard](https://github.com/rucio/monitoring-templates/blob/main/logstash-monitoring/Dashboards/Rucio-Storage.json) example for rse given.

Note: Dashboard example is just for giving some idea, they might need to be tweaked according to your setup and needs. They might be also be on old versions. 

## Rucio Monitoring Probes

Rucio provides a collection of **monitoring probes** that check the different status metrics of the Rucio.

> The list of probes is available [here](https://github.com/rucio/probes/tree/master).  

Reviewer 2: I would just link to common, the CMS and Atlas probes are useful to know about but generally not supported for other communities

> There are [common](https://github.com/rucio/probes/tree/master/common) probes shared across experiments, and you can also create your own experiment-specific probes for custom monitoring.

Reviewer 2: Here's some probe templates that could be useful to include here: 

https://gist.github.com/voetberg/19e8f0f621f3e5c6afc346179573e8ac (Less sure on the nagios probe, as I haven't written one before lol)

The container can push results either to a **Prometheus Pushgateway** or export data for **Nagios** alerting.

```mermaid
%%{init: {'theme': 'base', 'themeVariables': {
  'primaryColor': '#d8e3e7',
  'edgeLabelBackground': '#ffffff',
  'tertiaryColor': '#cdd5d9',
  'fontFamily': 'monospace',
  'primaryBorderColor': '#90a4ae',
  'lineColor': '#90a4ae'
}}}%%
flowchart LR
  Probe["Rucio Probes (Schedule via Jabber or others)"]
  Nagios["Nagios"]
  Prometheus["Prometheus"]
  Grafana["Grafana Dashboards"]

  Probe -- Exit code + stdout --> Nagios
  Probe -- Gauge metrics  via Pushgateway--> Prometheus
  Prometheus --> Grafana

  classDef probe fill:#d8e3e7,stroke:#607d8b,color:#000,font-size:12px;
  classDef nagios fill:#E53935,stroke:#B71C1C,color:#fff,font-weight:bold;
  classDef prom fill:#00868,stroke:#00695C,color:#fff,font-weight:bold;
  classDef graf fill:#F05A28,stroke:#b03e16,color:#fff,font-weight:bold;

  class Probe probe;
  class Nagios nagios;
  class prometheus prom;
  class Grafana graf;
```

Probe Execution Workflow is:

- **Probes** are Python scripts under `rucio/probes/`.
- **Jobber** acts as a cron-like scheduler inside the container.
- **Output options:**

>   - **Prometheus Pushgateway:** for time-series metrics. Alert in prometheus Alert manager or Grafana Alert manager.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  - **Prometheus Pushgateway:** for time-series metrics. Alerts can be added with [Prometheus](https://prometheus.io/docs/alerting/latest/alertmanager/) and [Grafana](https://grafana.com/docs/grafana/latest/alerting/set-up/configure-alertmanager/) alert management. 
```

>   - **Nagios:** for exit-code–based alerting.

Reviewer 2: @dchristidis Do you have a few words for how Atlas is using Nagios?

Reviewer 3: Nagios is used as a glorified cron engine. Most of the probes don’t serve a monitoring purpose: creating scopes, accounts, identities, RSE, RSE attributes, and more. When a probes does monitoring, it’s typically pushing data to Prometheus. The exit code mostly reflects how well the probe run, not the state of a service or metric.

Despite its shortcomings, we have had a positive experience with Nagios mainly because we can configure the alerts to our liking: being sent after a certain number of failures, not being resent unless the output changes, and more. As a bonus, its web interface provides a nice overview of the state of the probes, plus an easy way to make tweaks (e.g. trigger a probe run or silence an alarm).
